So we have these brain chemicals, there's
a whole host of them. One of them
that's of particular importance to us is
dopamine. Now dopamine is something that
allows us just feel good. You feel
pleasure if you score the winning goal
in your high school team, you feel
pleasure if you nail that exam or if you
played a beautiful piece flawlessly
and you didn't make a single mistake and
you feel really good, and somebody or your boss said "way to go, good job". That's
natural pleasure. If you were to take
morphine or heroin or some of the other
opiates they bind to an endogenous
opiate receptor in the brain, and those
receptors are very close to where the
dopamine receptors are. And so what they
do is they make more dopamine release.
That euphoria is much greater than
the normal feeling of just feeling
good.
Have you ever been on a seesaw with
a friend and you have to adjust your
side you so that you guys are just
perfectly balanced right? And then what
do you do as a nine-year-old? You kinda
scoot back a little bit, then you to jump
off real quick, you know, and you
laugh and you see your friend go down to
the ground. That's actually how the brain works, and so we've got this really nice
balancing act going on and now you take
heroin and you put heroin on it, well
that pushes it down like this.
Well the brain says wait a minute that's
not the normal. The brain tries to compensate
for that.
Oh well we have to use more drug because
now we're not feeling the effects.
That's the tolerance. The problem with that
is what happens when you stop? Now you
have anxiety, irritability, a very bad
mood. They start getting very anxious and
upset, and in fact there are a lot of
physiological changes that occur as well.
They get fairly profound diarrhea, they
start to salivate, their eyes water, they
get photosensitive. And if they take heroin
during that time,
guess what heroin does? It removes that bad
feeling, and that's called negative
reinforcement, and nothing is more
powerful than taking away pain.